---
layout: post
title: "vpython - easier virtualenv"
categories:
  - python
  - bash
  - virtualenv
---

I - like most python hackers - use virtualenv on a daily basis.
I love virtualenv. It allows me to install packages in a local context,
without isolating my development environment completely.

- - - - 

What is [vpython][repo]
----------------------

Vpython is a tiny(-ish) bash script to help with your day to day virtualenv needs.

- You don't have to worry about sourcing the activate script.
- You don't have to point to your virtualenv path.

just use `vpython` instead of `python` to invoke your scripts.

### How

Vpython works by looking for at virtualenv directory in the directory of the script you invoke.
If not found, it will go up one directory and search in the parent.
When vpython detects a virtualenv folder, it will use that folder's configuration
to run whatever you asked vpython to run, just like had it been `python`.

Running `vpython` with first argument being a directory, it will look
search for a virtualenv directory, just like when invoking a script.
When a virtualenv is found, vpython will invoke the virtualenv's `python`,
handing you a python shell for that virtualenv.

If no arguments are given to `vpython`, it will use you current working directory
to search for a virtualenv path.

Use `vpython --help` to see full help text.

Usecase
-----------------------

This is our folder structure:

    /home/tbug/src/demo-project/
    |-- .virtualenv
    |   +-- { regular virtualenv directory structure here }
    +-- script.py

With regular virtualenv, we would do something like

    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> source .virtualenv/bin/activate
    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> python script.py
    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> deactivate


and with vpython
    
    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> vpython script.py


It might not seem like much to save a line (noone deactivates a virtualenv, right?)
and you are right.  
The strength of vpython is the ability to look up the virtualenv
no matter what path is your current working directory, and even if that script
is behind a symlink.

Say our `script.py` is some utility that we want to use all the time.
We might link it somewhere on our path, like `/usr/local/bin`.

But we still need the virtualenv to activate before the script is run?! What do?!

If we use vpython, the virtualenv configuration will be correctly loaded before
running our script.

We can even use `vpython` in the script's shebang.  
Pretend this is our `script.py`, and that it contains something very useful:

{% highlight python %}
#!vpython
#imaging that we import something useful from our virtualenv site-packages
print "hello vpython world"
{% endhighlight %}

Now, if you make that script executable, no matter where you run it from, it will
use the correct virtualenv directory. As long as `script.py` is inside a folder
(or subfolder) of a virtualenv directory, it will work.

Let's try symlinking `script.py` to `/usr/local/bin`, or wherever
you put your stuff:

    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> ln -s `pwd`/script.py /usr/local/bin/script
    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> #it is now liked to our path as "script"
    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> script
    Using virtualenv at "/home/tbug/src/demo-project/.virtualenv"
    hello vpython world

**Note** that vpython always tell you where it found the running virtualenv.
If you don't want that, you can invoke vpython with the `-q` or `--quiet` flag.

Installing vpython
---------------------------

Make sure you have a working python and virtualenv installed
(vpython will warn you if they are missing, so don't worry).

1. Clone the [repository from github][repo] (`https://github.com/tbug/tbug.github.io.git`).
2. Run the installer script (`vpython/install.sh`).
3. There is no step 3.

The installer will try to place symlinks to the vpython and vpip scripts
in `~/bin` if it exists, otherwise it will install it to `/usr/bin`.

**Note** that if `~/bin` exists, it is assumed that it is also on your `$PATH`.

Updating vpython
--------------------------

1) `cd` to the path of the `vpython` repo clone.
2) run `git pull`.
3. Once again; no step 3.


Starting a new environment
--------------------------

Vpython also contains wrappers for creating and installing packages inside
a virtualenv.

    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> vpython --install .
    New python executable in /home/tbug/src/demo-project/.virtualenv/bin/python
    Installing setuptools, pip...done.

By default, vpython will install the virtualenv to a folder called `.virtualenv`.
You can change this by setting the `ENV_NAME` environment variable like this:

    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> ENV_NAME=env vpython --install .
    New python executable in /home/tbug/src/demo-project/env/bin/python
    Installing setuptools, pip...done.

It is only necessary to set this when installing a new environment.
When using an existing environment, vpython doesn't care about the environment name.


Now that you have a new environment, it is time to install some packages.

    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> vpython --pip . install asynckit

The syntax here is:

    vpython --pip (virtualenv lookup path) (pip arguments...)

This is a bit cumbersome, so vpython ships with the `vpip` helper.

`vpip` assumes your current directory is where you want to look for a virtualenv,
so if your current working directory is somewhere within a virtualenv, you can
use `vpip` just as regular `pip`:

    /home/tbug/src/demo-project $> vpip install asynckit
    Using virtualenv at "/home/tbug/src/demo-project/.virtualenv"
    Downloading/unpacking asynckit
    ..............................
    Successfully installed asynckit
    Cleaning up...


Something broke!
-----------------

Oh dear!
If you find an error, open an [issue][issues], or send me a pull request with a fix.




[repo]:   https://github.com/tbug/vpython
[issues]: https://github.com/tbug/vpython/issues
