---
layout: post
title:  "Elixir 1.9.1 Releases"
categories:
  - erlang
  - elixir
  - mix
---

This is a short introduction to creating releases with Elixir 1.9.1+
which contains [built-in tooling for releases][mix-release].

A release is a bundle of the runtime and pre-compiled code,
and a set of configurations more suitible for production (like running in embedded mode).

On top of that, Elixir's new built-in release handling adds some
much needed tools for runtime configuration for releases, something
that has been a pain in the past, with tools like relx.

## Creating a Release

In 1.9.1+ creating a release is super easy.
You can ask mix to generate some release configuration files for you:

```
$ mix release.init
```

and create a release with

```
$ mix release
```

which will generate a release in (by default)

```
 _build/dev/rel/<release>
```

To create a production release

```
MIX_ENV=prod mix release
```

which will output a release in 

```
 _build/prod/rel/<release>
```

You can now tar the release folder and move it to your target system.




## Running a Release


I've created an example project with `mix new --sup` and changed my application controller to:

```elixir
defmodule ReleaseExample.Application do
  use Application

  def start(_type, _args) do
    IO.puts("Hello Release")
    opts = [strategy: :one_for_one, name: ReleaseExample.Supervisor]
    Supervisor.start_link([], opts)
  end
end
```

And created a dev release with `mix release`.

Now let's try and start it:

```
$ _build/dev/rel/release_example/bin/release_example start
Hello Release
```

Great, it works.

You can also start it with an iex shell with

```
$ _build/dev/rel/release_example/bin/release_example start_iex
Erlang/OTP 22 [erts-10.4.3] [source] [64-bit] [smp:8:8] [ds:8:8:10] [async-threads:1] [hipe]

Hello Release
Interactive Elixir (1.9.1) - press Ctrl+C to exit (type h() ENTER for help)
iex(release_example@tbugsgnmbp)1>
```

but in a production system you are better of running the regular `start` command
as a service (with `systemd`, in a container, or however you normally run services)
and connect to it with a remote shell:

```
# shell 1
$ _build/dev/rel/release_example/bin/release_example start
Hello Release


# shell 2
$ _build/dev/rel/release_example/bin/release_example remote
Erlang/OTP 22 [erts-10.4.3] [source] [64-bit] [smp:8:8] [ds:8:8:10] [async-threads:1] [hipe]

Interactive Elixir (1.9.1) - press Ctrl+C to exit (type h() ENTER for help)
iex(release_example@tbugsgnmbp)1>
```


## Configuration

Configuration works like normal.
`config/config.exs` is the compile-time configuration you use to configure
things you know beforehand.

Releases also gives you the option to do runtime configuration with
`config/releases.exs`.

This file is evaluated at each application boot.
A few rules must be followed for this to work. From the docs:

> - It MUST import Config at the top instead of the deprecated use Mix.Config
> - It MUST NOT import any other configuration file via import_file
> - It MUST NOT access Mix in any way, as Mix is a build tool and it not available inside releases

This is a valid `config/releases.exs` file:

```
import Config
config :my_app, :secret_key, System.fetch_env!("MY_APP_SECRET_KEY")
```


See [Application Configuration](https://hexdocs.pm/mix/Mix.Tasks.Release.html#module-application-configuration) for details.

---

Releases can do a lot more than what I've shown, and has a bunch
of options for customization,
like bundling extra files into the release, adding custom start and stop scripts,
configure the VM, cut a subset of your umbrella project as a release,
hot code upgrade, and a bunch more.

It's by far the best way to package your Elixir applications and you should use it.

Check out the [release documentation][mix-release] for a more detailed walkthrough.


[mix-release]: https://hexdocs.pm/mix/Mix.Tasks.Release.html
